So we have taken a health insurance policy
but there are many questions on renewal
which we are not able to figure out the answer to. There are
many challenging questions in
our mind about what should be there or not before renewing the policy.
Today I will try my best to answer those questions.
If we talk about three ways in which a
health insurance policy is taken,
one is fresh, which means you are taking a new policy.
Today you are starting afresh,
starting in a new way and
you will have to serve all the waiting periods.
Second is portability. You are porting the policy
from one insurance company to another,
where
your continuity benefits are carried forward
to the new insurance
company. Third is renewal. Your policy is
running in any company. Next year
on your contract date, suppose
you had taken a one year policy, it was February to
February, then you will renew in February 2025.
Suppose you had taken a 3 year policy, it was a
3 year contract, then in February
You took it in 2022 and your three years end in February 2025,
so you
renew the policy, you will renew that contract, so
what things do you have to keep in mind at the time of renewal,
which questions are
you looking for answers,
we will talk about that in detail, before starting the video, I would
like to introduce myself, my name is Gurleen K Chikku, I
am a Certified Financial Planner, I have been associated
with the insurance industry for the last 20 years
and every week I bring videos for you
so that your insurance
buying journey becomes easy and happy
because the tagline of our company is also
creating a wealth of happiness, so let's
move towards the video, what things do you have to keep in mind during the renewal of your own health
insurance renewal guide,
so
first of all we will talk about
what is the benefit of renewal, why should you renew the policy, the
biggest benefit is that you get
continuity benefit, which was already
your policy which you had an
insurance  The
time has come to renew the policy. If you renew,
its benefits are carried
forward. Secondly, there is financial
security. If your family faces a medical
emergency, you
can shift your financial burden to the insurance policy.
This is the benefit of renewing. Many times
these questions also arise in your mind
that I have not taken any claim for so long,
what is the benefit of renewing the
policy, what is the benefit of running the policy.
This is the benefit of running the policy. You never know because it works
on probability that when the
claim will come, no one knows when you will face a medical emergency.
All of a sudden,
accidental emergency can also occur, there can be a
prolonged illness for which you have to be
admitted, then your policy will be useful for you.
Thirdly, at the time of renewal, you also
ask this question that should I renew the policy
or take a fresh one. If you take a fresh policy, if you take a
new policy, then
your waiting periods will be reset again. You will have to
serve the waiting period from the beginning for a specific number of
years.  The
waiting period for exclusions is three
years. There is a waiting period for pre-existing diseases. There is a
moratorium benefit where
if you run the policy for five years, the
insurance company can deny your claim.
If you want to understand all this in detail,
detailed videos are also available on our channel,
you can refer to them. So your
waiting periods get reset. If
you keep renewing, the waiting
periods will not reset. Now we will talk about
what things you need to keep in mind at the time of renewal.
First of all, renewal
before the due date. Your renewal dates should be
in your mind. You should know
when is my policy due for renewal.
Let's say for example,
your policy is due from 9th February 2024
to 8th February 2025. So your due date is
not 9th February, it is 8th February 2025. So
your policy is expiring on the midnight of 8th February 2025.
You have to renew before that.
So what will happen if you do not renew on time, suppose
February 8 has passed and you renew after that, the
insurance company gives you a grace period of 10
days, but if during that grace period
any medical history is diagnosed,
any illness of yours
which you did not have earlier is diagnosed later during the
grace period, then the
insurance company will not pay the claim for that, so if
you have been running the policy for so many years, if you
miss your due date once, you will
not get the cover, you will face a challenge in the claim,
so never miss your due date, miss anything, do
not miss the renewal premium of health insurance, that means it has to be done before the due
date, rather do it a
week in advance, so that if there is any technical
issue, there is a problem in clearance in the bank,
some issue comes, your
policy copy should be in your hand one
week before your due date, make sure this happens, the
second thing you have to keep in mind is
because the health insurance
industry is changing so fast, everything is
changing, so you have to evaluate  It is
very important that you do not
take a policy once and you just fill it and forget it. You do
not have to evaluate it
because many riders get added on.
You get many options.
On renewal, you
can migrate within the insurance company, you can upgrade to a better plan,
you can port it,
but this will happen only when you evaluate it.
Unless you see
what is covered and what is not covered in your policy,
you will not know what else you need. You will
know only when you
evaluate your policy. You will see what all needs to be checked.
Mainly, whether there is
any room rate capping in your policy, whether
your non-payable items are covered in your policy, whether
OPD is covered in your policy,
if you need OPD,
is maternity covered in your policy, if
maternity is definitely needed, does your
policy keep you fully covered? You also have to keep in mind
which are the cashless network hospitals of your policy
and
whether your time is charged.  If you have a
sum assured of Rs 3 lakh, Rs 5 lakh or even Rs 10 lakh, I would
suggest that you upgrade your sum assured
gradually. If your
pocket allows, then you
can immediately take it to Rs 2550. But if you
feel that you will have to pay a lot of premium,
then you can upgrade it gradually. So
your policy is up to date, that is, the
current requirements like
modern treatments, robotic surgeries, are they
covered in your policies. So,
renew your policy only after evaluating these things. That is why I said to do it
before the due date. So that you will have
time to think about what changes you have to make, what
add-ons you have to add, what subtractions you have to make.
At times, what happens is that
some old riders are attached which you do
not need. Let's say you had taken the policy 5 years ago
with maternity benefit, now you do
not need maternity benefit, you are paying
premium unnecessarily. You had taken
worldwide cover, you had taken global
coverage.  If you had taken it and now you do not want it, then you can
remove it. Evaluation is necessary at
the time of renewal. Third,
definitely check the no-claim bonuses in your policy. When you are
renewing your policy, the company
gives you some bonuses. It can be in the
form of sum assured increment or
you get a discount on your premium.
Check whether you have received it or not
and check whether there is any bonus
which you can add by paying a
small additional premium. So, definitely check that too.
You can get more benefit by paying a small additional premium. So,
evaluate whether you have a no-claim bonus in your policy or
not
and what are the options with better no-claim bonus.
Next, it is very important if your
policy includes wellness benefits.
So, many times, what happens in your policy is that the
insurance company focuses on your illness, that if
you have a medical emergency, then they will give
you a claim. They also focus on your wellness, which is whatever
steps you take.  It
gives you its benefit and gives
you some discounts depending on how active you are.
So check it usually in your health
application. Whichever company's policy you have
taken, if it includes wellness benefit,
step count or that
discount percentage is mentioned in the health app. Many
times there can be an error in the renewal notice also. It is
showing in your app that you are going to get a
discount of 10% from the steps but the
discount has not been applied in the renewal notice. Then
you will have to reach out to the
insurance company and your insurance agent to get it
rectified.
I am eligible for the discount and I want to pay the
premium with the discount.
This will happen only if you
keep your app installed and up to date
and if you qualify for the wellness benefit
and if the correct discount is
not applied, then also intimate the insurance company
because once renewed,
those changes cannot be made later.
Next, this is an important point if
you are enhancing your sum assured at the
Time of Naval: So here it is important for you to tell your medical
history. Your
policy was started from LT. I am taking an example
in 2010. Right now we are sitting in 2025. From
2010 to 2025, it is possible that some
medical history might have been diagnosed. You did
not change the sum assured at that time. The sum assured of 10 lakhs was running short.
Now you want to enhance it from LTs to
50 lakhs. You want to take 10 lakhs instead of 50 lakhs.
Suppose in 202021 you were
diagnosed with blood pressure and diabetes. Now when you are
increasing in 2025, it is
important for you to tell the insurance company that
I was diagnosed with blood pressure or diabetes
in 202021. So I want to disclose
in the policy. So what will be its impact? This
increased sum assured is 50 - 10 lakhs. As it is, it will
continue because the old sum assured,
which is the upper sum assured of 40 lakhs,
you will have to serve a waiting period on that.  You may have to do this,
you may be charged premium loading on that, so
your enhancement time shot will be
impacted. Similarly, your
specific exclusions which have
a waiting period of
two years for slow growing illnesses will be applicable on the enhancement sum assured, so that
waiting period will be applicable on the sum assured of Rs. 50-10 lakh, which is Rs. 40 lakh. So
keep this thing in mind also, it is not that if
you increase then that policy
is fully covered from day one. You should be aware of this.
Next, at the time of renewal,
check whether your address has changed or not.
Many times, the old address is entered and
you have shifted, then it is
necessary for you to intimate it to the insurance company.
Why is it even more important
because many times it happens that we get
our address updated in Aadhaar but
we have not updated it in the policy document. I
assume you were in January 2,
earlier you had taken the policy as per January 2,
now you have come to January 1, so  Currently, you were
paying the premium for Jan 2, which is a lower
premium. You can avail treatment anywhere. There is
no pan-India restriction,
but you have shifted to Jan 1 and have
not informed the insurance company. Your
Aadhaar card has been updated in your ID proof.
So what will happen here? When the claim
comes tomorrow, you will have to provide your ID proof.
You paid the premium for Jan 1 and Jan 2. So, there could be a
challenge in the claim here. So keep in mind that
if your address has changed, then
definitely inform the insurance company
before renewal that your address has been changed.
You can also do this mid-term.
Suppose you make changes after renewing the policy or in between,
you can still do it.
But pay special attention at the time of renewal
because the renewal premium may change, it may
decrease or increase. If you are shifting from Jan 2 to
Jan 1, then the premium will be
higher. Suppose you have shifted from Jan 1 to Jan 2.
You used to live in Mumbai and
now you have shifted to Bangalore, so your premium has
reduced. So, you are eligible for a lower premium. So
keep this in mind as well.
Next is add-on riders. Now what other add-ons
can you add to your policy? Many times this happens,
we have done the evaluation
but there is a rider which is the non-payable
items rider. Make sure that you
add this to your policies because what happens is that
some percentage of your total bill,
approximately 10 to 15 percent, is for non-payable
items like gloves, masks, PP kits,
all these are non-payable items which are
not covered in your policy. So
keep this thing in mind and definitely add on the consumption rider
if it is
not already included in your policy. And lastly,
you must read the terms and conditions of your policy
again. Many times it happens that
we had taken the policy a long time ago,
I do not remember its terms and conditions. I have taken the
policy but I do not know
what is covered and what is not covered in my policy.
So make sure you are up to date with
your policy terms and conditions. Now it will be a
matter of renewal.
What are the things that need to be kept in mind on time? But
if you miss renewing due to any
reason, suppose you were travelling,
your payment was made but it did not go
through or you delayed it for some reason, then
what could be its disadvantages? First of all,
you get a grace period of 30 days,
within which you
can renew your policy, but during those 30 days, no
claim will be given to you. If any
medical history is diagnosed, then it will not be given. The
second problem is, suppose you
said that I will renew or I will renew during the grace period,
what happens there,
during the grace period, some critical illness is
diagnosed, let's say cancer or heart
disease. Now what will happen? The
insurance company will be apprehensive, they
can even stop you from renewing,
restrictions can also be imposed in the policy
because something is diagnosed during the grace period
and they will say that we will
not give you the claim related to it or will not allow you to renew the policy.
So this is a big challenge.  So
make sure that if you have any medical history or even if you do
n't, renew your policy timely. Do
not wait for the grace period. And even
if you want to do a court,
you will
not be able to avail the portability benefit in the grace period. If you want to do
portability, then
you can apply for portability
or apply for migration before the policy due date.
You will not be able to do anything in the grace period.
So make sure that you renew your
policy on time without any fail.
Keep your reminders ready.
Prepare your mind. Prepare your bank balance.
That my health
insurance premium has to be paid every year.
Make a provision for it. So this was a health
insurance renewal guide from my side. All the questions that
you had in your mind are
answered in this video. If you have any other
questions, please share them
in the comment section. We will try our best to answer them.
And before leaving, a quick
reminder, if you have not yet subscribed to our channel, do so.
So that you get the  We will
get the right information at the right time in the next video, till then stay
safe and take care, bye bye.